---
title: 'For Undergraduate Students'
date: 2025-08-26
permalink: /posts/2025/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - internships
  - career fair
  - research
  - applying for graduate school 
  - jobs
---

**Advice for Undergraduates: Choosing Between Jobs and Graduate School**
====
As an undergraduate student, you will eventually face one of the most important decisions of your early career: should you enter the workforce or continue your studies in graduate school? Having gone through this myself, I want to share some lessons and strategies I wish I knew when I was an undergrad. Whether you are leaning toward getting a job right after graduation or considering graduate school, the key is preparation and using the resources around you wisely.

**Option 1: Getting a Job**
=====
For many students, the next step after graduation is entering the workforce. Landing that first job can feel overwhelming, but with the right preparation and strategy, you can stand out and make the process smoother. Below are some tips based on experience and what I wish I had known earlier.

**Networking**
- Start early. Build relationships with classmates, alumni, and professors. These networks often become your most valuable source of job opportunities. Many of your classmates, especially those ahead of you, will eventually find jobs somewhere and they may refer you to a position with their company. 
- Keep LinkedIn updated and professional. Do not just connect with people. Engage with their posts, share your projects, and demonstrate your interests. I found it particulary useful to follow/conenct with recruiters from companies as they often post job openings. 

**Career Fairs**
Career fairs are events where employers and recruiters come to meet students and share information about open positions, internships, and company culture. They are a chance for you to introduce yourself, make a strong first impression, and learn about opportunities that may not be widely advertised. For large career fairs (e.g., SHPE, SWE) expect there to be hundreds or thousands of applications for a single position. It is common to wait in line for hours for a chance to have a 1 minute conversation with a recruiter, which is why preparation is key. The goal of a career fair should be to land an interview which can be done at the career fair's interview booth or scheduled for a different time. Some tips for a successful career fair are: 

- Stand out by showing initiative. Do not let the recruiter do most of the talking.
- Research open positions beforehand. If you ask about an opening you already saw online and explain why you are a good fit, recruiters are more likely to take you seriously. Also, if possible, look up the recruiters information online so you know them better. 
- You need to realize that there are hundreds of applications for a single position. You need to ask youself what sets you apart from the other applicants. Some ways to do this are talking about an interesting project you have done that resonates with the recuiter/position, asking thoughtful questions that are not commonly asked, and showing enthusiasm. 
- If a recruiter tells you to apply online, it usually means you did not convince them in person.
- Use a team strategy. Coordinate with friends, share which companies are actually hiring, and update each other through a group chat. In many large career fairs, you often spend a lot of time waiting in line. By splitting up and communicating with your group, you can determine which recruiters are actually hiring and giving out interviews. 
- Scout the interview booths. This gives you insight into which companies are seriously recruiting since companies often need to reserve interview booths in advance (the company's names will be shown on each booth). Likewise, observing the nametags of the recruiters who go into the booths will show you who is hiring. Many recruiters go to career fairs, but do no intend to recruit anyone. Avoid these companies if you are looking for a position. 

**Interview Process**
- Practice as much as you can and show enthusiasm for the position. 
- Research the company that you are interviewing for, such as their mission, and current projects.
- Look up your interviewer on LinkedIn.
- Be prepared to ask questions to the interviewer, which shows enthusiasm. 
- Use your career center or platforms like Pramp and Interviewing.io for mock interviews.
- Even if you do not want a position, apply anyway. It gives you free practice for interviewing and lets you test how well your resume is working.

**Internships**
Most internships happen over the summer and are a great way to test out a job before committing. If you perform well, you may secure a return offer, which saves you from another stressful job search. All the advice for finding a job applies to finding an internship. A lot of job recruiters will look for internship experience before hiring you for a full-time job so it is very important to have participated in some internships. 


**Option 2: Graduate School**
====
**What Is Graduate School**
Graduate school is about research. Professors, also called PIs, apply for grants from government agencies or industry. The grant money pays for research costs, tuition, and often a living stipend for students. Some students are funded through teaching assistantships, where the university pays them to help teach classes. Yes, you get paid to do a PhD. You do not pay tuition, and while the stipend is not huge, it covers basic living expenses. A lot of people pursue a PhD to become an independent researcher such as a professor in academia, staff scientist in a National Lab, or a resercher in industry. However, there are also a significant number of students who go into jobs like consulting, venture capital, or creating a startup. 

There are also two kinds of master's degree. A thesis-based master’s degree is research-focused. Students work under the supervision of a professor to complete a research project, write a thesis, and often publish or present their work. It is ideal for those interested in research careers or planning to pursue a PhD. A non-thesis master’s degree is course-based. Instead of completing a thesis, students take additional classes or sometimes a capstone project. It is usually shorter, more structured, and designed for students who want to gain advanced knowledge and enter the workforce directly rather than continue in research. You do need to pay a significant amount of tuition for a master's degree and don't usually get a stipend as you would for a PhD. However, there are some cases where a professor is willing to waive the tuition fee and/or pay a stipend to the master's student.

**Good reasons to pursue Graduate School (PhD Track)**
- You are passionate about research.
- You are curious and want to learn more technical skills.
- You enjoy teaching and mentoring.
- You want more time to explore career paths. This is especially relevant for international students navigating visas or green card processes.
- You could not find a job yet but still want to grow academically.

**Bad reasons to pursue Graduate School (PhD Track)**
- You do not enjoy independent work.
- You are mainly motivated by money. Many industry jobs pay much more.
- You do not want to spend 5 more years in school for a PhD

**People that make up Graduate School**
- Professors or Principal Investigators (PI) focus on grants, publishing, teaching, and running labs. They get paid mainly from their grants.
- Teaching Professors focus on teaching and curriculum development. They get paid by the university. 
- Postdocs usually have completed a PhD degree and are pursuing further training or develop their skills under a professor. Postdocs usually pursue positions in academia. They are paid by fellowships or by their professor's grant. 
- Graduate students are pursuing a Masters or PhD degree. They are mentored by a professor, perform most of the research that the professor comes up with and can act as teaching assistants (TA) for some undergrad/grad classes. They get paid from their professor's grant if they are doing reserach that quarter/semester, a fellowship (NSF-GFRP, DOE-SCGSR), or from the university if they are a TA. 
- Undergrad researchers join a lab for research experience. They often are mentored by a graduate student. They usually do not get paid, but can be paid from the grant money or external funding (e.g., NSF-REU). 


**How to Apply to Graduate School**

For PhD programs, research experience is very important, and you must show this in your statement of purpose when applying to graduate schools. Research experience allows you to apply classroom knowledge to real problems, develop critical thinking skills, and learn how to handle projects without clear answers. It is especially important if you plan to pursue graduate school, since admissions committees want to see that you understand what research involves. It also helps you build strong relationships with professors who can later provide recommendation letters. Even if you do not continue in research, the skills you gain in problem-solving, data analysis, and independent work make you a stronger candidate for jobs. As an undergrad there are several ways to obtain research experience. 

- Look at the department website and identify professors who are doing research and identify topics that align with your interest, and talk to those professors or their graduate students, especially during office hours and ask if they are accepting any undergraduate students.
- Apply for programs like NSF REUs (Research Experiences for Undergraduates (US Citizens only)) for summer research opportunities. This program allows you to perform research for a summer at another institution, while covering your living costs, and giving you a stipend. 
- Cold Email professors asking if they are looking for undergraduate students. Many times professors are actively looking for undergraduate students because they need people to perform research but do not have enough funding to accept graduate students. 
- What professors look for in undergraduates: reliability, curiosity, willingness to learn, and genuine interest.

While applying to graduate school, you will need to write a a statement of purpose (SOP). It is a written essay where you explain your research interests, academic background, and career goals. The purpose is to show admissions committees why you want to pursue a PhD, what specific areas of research excite you, and how your experiences have prepared you for graduate-level work. A strong SOP also demonstrates that you understand the program’s strengths and that your interests align with the faculty’s research, making you a good fit for the department. Some useful tips that I would recommend when writing a SOP are:

- Explain what motivated your interest in research and how your academic or professional experiences led you to pursue a PhD. Keep the flow logical and easy to follow.
- Highlight projects, internships, or research you have done. Emphasize your role, the skills you gained, and any outcomes like presentations, publications, or reports. However, do not just list all the experiences that you have done, since that can be easily discovered in your resume/CV.
- Mention specific professors you want to work with and explain why. Show that you have researched the program and that your interests align with ongoing projects.
-Avoid vague statements like “I love science.” Instead, describe particular research questions or problems you are passionate about. Explain why you are passionate in the research that you want to pursue in grad school. 


**Extra Advice I Wish I Knew Earlier**
====
Build transferable skills. Learn coding, data analysis, public speaking, or writing. These skills are valuable in both jobs and graduate school. Find mentors and expand your network. Upperclassmen, graduate students, alumni, or professors can help you avoid mistakes they made. Time management is crucial. Balancing classes, research, and networking will stretch you, and learning to manage your time will help you for life. Do not compare yourself too much. Everyone’s path looks different. Some land jobs right away, others take gap years, others go into graduate school. Focus on what fits you. 


**Closing Thoughts**
====
Your undergraduate years are about more than just grades. They are about preparing for your next step. Whether you go straight into a job or pursue graduate school, the opportunities you create through networking, internships, and research will shape your future. The earlier you start preparing, the more options you will have when it is time to choose.


 (work currently in progress - if you have any questions that you want answered feel free to email me at htchiang08@gmail.com)

**Note:** This is just my perspective and experience — your path may look different.  


